Add Health Checks for Multi-Site deployment to HA Docs (#33112)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/guides/high-availability/health-checks-multi-site.adoc

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Health checks for multi-site deployments"
summary="Validating the health of a multi-site deployment" >

When running the <@links.ha id="introduction" /> in a Kubernetes environment,
you should automate checks to see if everything is up and running as expected.

> This page provides an overview of URLs,
> Kubernetes resources and Healthcheck endpoints available to verify a multi-site setup of {project_name}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides an overview of URLs,
Kubernetes resources, and Healthcheck endpoints available to verify a multi-site setup of {project_name}.
```

== Overview

> A proactive monitoring strategy aims to detect and alert on issues before they impact users. It is the key for a highly resilient and highly available {project_name} application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A proactive monitoring strategy aims to detect and alert about issues before they impact users. This strategy is the key for a highly resilient and highly available {project_name} application.
```

> Health checks across various architectural components (like application health, load balancing, caching, and overall system status) are critical for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Health checks across various architectural components (such as application health, load balancing, caching, and overall system status) are critical for:
```

> Ensuring High Availability:: By verifying that all sites and the load balancer are operational, it helps guarantee that the system can handle requests even if one site goes down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensuring High Availability:: Verifying that all sites and the load balancer are operational is a key to ensure that  a system can handle requests even if one site goes down.
```

> Maintaining Performance:: Checking the health and distribution of the {jdgserver_name} cache ensures that {project_name} can maintain optimal performance by efficiently handling sessions and other temporary data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintaining performance:: Checking the health and distribution of the {jdgserver_name} cache ensures that {project_name} can maintain optimal performance by efficiently handling sessions and other temporary data.
```

> Operational Resilience:: By continuously monitoring the health of both {project_name} and its dependencies within the Kubernetes environment, the system can quickly identify and possibly auto-remediate issues, reducing downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operational resilience:: By continuously monitoring the health of both {project_name} and its dependencies within the Kubernetes environment, the system can quickly identify and possibly auto-remediate issues, reducing downtime.
```

== Prerequisites

. https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[Kubectl CLI is installed and configured].

> . Install https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/[jq] if it is not available on your OS already.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Install https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/[jq] if it is not available on your operating system already.
```

> == Specific Health Checks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Specific health checks
```

> === {project_name} Load Balancer and Sites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== {project_name} load balancer and sites
```

Verifies the health of the {project_name} application through its load balancer and both primary and backup sites. This ensures that {project_name} is accessible and that the load balancing mechanism is functioning correctly across different geographical or network locations.

> This command returns the health status of the {project_name} application's connection to its configured database, thus confirming the reliability of db connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command returns the health status of the {project_name} application's connection to its configured database, thus confirming the reliability of database connections.
```

> This is only available on the management port, and not available from the external URL.
> In a Kubernetes setup, the sub-status `health/ready` is checked periodically to make the Pod as ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command is available only on the management port and not from the external URL.
In a Kubernetes setup, the sub-status `health/ready` is checked periodically to make the Pod as ready.
```

[source,bash]
----
curl -s https://keycloak:managementport/health
----

This command verifies the `lb-check` endpoint of the load balancer and ensures the {project_name} application cluster is up and running.
[source,bash]
----
curl -s https://keycloak-load-balancer-url/lb-check
----

> These commands will return the running status of the Site A and Site B of the {project_name} in a cross-site setup (be it Active/Passive or Active/Active).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These commands will return the running status of the Site A and Site B of the {project_name} in a cross-site setup (whether it is Active/Passive or Active/Active).
```

[source,bash]
----
curl -s https://keycloak_site_a_url/lb-check
curl -s https://keycloak_site_b_url/lb-check
----

> === {jdgserver_name} Cache Health
> Check the health of the default cache manager and individual caches in an external {jdgserver_name} cluster.
> This is vital for {project_name} performance and reliability,
> as {jdgserver_name} is often used for distributed caching and session clustering in {project_name} deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== {jdgserver_name} Cache health
Check the health of the default cache manager and individual caches in an external {jdgserver_name} cluster.
This check is vital for {project_name} performance and reliability,
as {jdgserver_name} is often used for distributed caching and session clustering in {project_name} deployments.
```

> This command returns the overall health of the {jdgserver_name} cache manager, this is useful as the Admin user doesn't need to provide user credentials to get the health status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command returns the overall health of the {jdgserver_name} cache manager, which is useful as the Admin user does not need to provide user credentials to get the health status.
```

[source,bash]
----
curl -s https://infinispan_rest_url/rest/v2/cache-managers/default/health/status
----

> Whereas for these health checks, Admin user needs to provide the {jdgserver_name} user credentials as part of the request to peek into the overall health of the external {jdgserver_name} cluster caches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast to the preceding health checks, the following health checks require the Admin user to provide the {jdgserver_name} user credentials as part of the request to peek into the overall health of the external {jdgserver_name} cluster caches.
```

[source,bash]
----
curl -u <infinispan_user>:<infinispan_pwd> -s https://infinispan_rest_url/rest/v2/cache-managers/default/health \
 | jq 'if .cluster_health.health_status == "HEALTHY" and (all(.cache_health[].status; . == "HEALTHY")) then "HEALTHY" else "UNHEALTHY" end'
----

The `jq` filter is a convenience to compute the overall health based on the individual cache health.

> Optionally you can run the above command without the `jq` filter to see the full details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also choose to run the above command without the `jq` filter to see the full details.
```

> === {jdgserver_name} Cluster Distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== {jdgserver_name} Cluster distribution
```

Assesses the distribution health of the {jdgserver_name} cluster, ensuring that the cluster's nodes are correctly distributing data. This step is essential for the scalability and fault tolerance of the caching layer.

You can modify the `expectedCount 3` argument to match the total nodes in the cluster and validate if they are healthy or not.
[source,bash]
----
curl <infinispan_user>:<infinispan_pwd> -s https://infinispan_rest_url/rest/v2/cluster\?action\=distribution \
 | jq --argjson expectedCount 3 'if map(select(.node_addresses | length > 0)) | length == $expectedCount then "HEALTHY" else "UNHEALTHY" end'
----

> === Overall, {jdgserver_name} System Health

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Overall, {jdgserver_name} system health
```

> Uses `kubectl` CLI tool to query the health status of {jdgserver_name} clusters and the {project_name} service in the specified namespace. This comprehensive check ensures that all components of the {project_name} deployment are operational and correctly configured within the Kubernetes environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uses the `kubectl` CLI tool to query the health status of {jdgserver_name} clusters and the {project_name} service in the specified namespace. This comprehensive check ensures that all components of the {project_name} deployment are operational and correctly configured within the Kubernetes environment.
```

[source,bash]
----
kubectl get infinispan -n <NAMESPACE> -o json  \
| jq '.items[].status.conditions' \
| jq 'map({(.type): .status})' \
| jq 'reduce .[] as $item ([]; . + [keys[] | select($item[.] != "True")]) | if length == 0 then "HEALTHY" else "UNHEALTHY: " + (join(", ")) end'
----

> === {project_name} Readiness in Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== {project_name} readiness in Kubernetes
```
